
He watched her eat the croissant. It was a chocolate croissant that was bought from a higher-end bakery store in the more fashionable part of town.  The building where the bakery stood had once been an old factory, churning out planks from timber a long time ago. Now it was a bakery with several apartments above. Soon the bakery would go bankrupt and a realtor's office would appear instead. And the people who lived in the floors above would complain about how they missed the bakery that they did not use enough but liked having there until the realtor sold their apartment and they moved to the suburbs with their newly born kid, and the dog they got as a test of parenthood some years before. And the new owners would move in without any knowledge of the bakery that once stood there, and life would go on. 

If the bakery would go out of business, it would not be because of too low of a price. The croissant could practically be covered with gold flakes and still not be worth it.  Maybe it tasted like heaven on earth? He would likely never know, she never shared sweets with him. 

He watched her take another bite. If he could describe her with a single word it would be innocence. Untouched by the troubles and trepidations of this world. He wondered if she had even struggled a little bit. Really struggled, being dragged out of my comfort zone and churned out as something else. 
Innocence is well and good, but it does not help when trying to understand the other's perspective. If you never have experienced what many people go through, how can you relate? 
He pondered those questions while she slowly ate her way through the pastry. He returned her smiles with his own, she looked happy. Did I make her happy or is this just her default state, smiling at everything?  

They sat at the bakery for what he felt was a lifetime but the watch showed only 30 minutes. They had no plans thereafter, nothing to get excited about. Maybe a quick stroll around the neighborhood and see how autumn slowly but steadily transformed the remnants of nature left from green to yellow to grey and white. It felt like the changing of seasons again reminded him of his age. What have I accomplished? It seemed like nothing now, nothing extraordinary or even noteworthy.  Even his so-called better half seemed now to look at him as a natural benefit, something you can fall back upon after trying for richer, more affluent men and losing out. These thoughts filled him with anger. 

The croissant was consumed, and they got up and walked around the park as expected. She noted that she liked the colors, which he tried to fake was something novel she said and not something she mentioned every single walk.  After the stroll, they went back home and watched a boring romantic comedy.  Nighttime came creeping in and they crept together into the bed like they had done so many times before.  The half-eaten takeaway bags sat on the table, and as the night crept on, it would reach a state where she would through everything in the trash the next day. 

The next morning was a comfortable although tiresome affair. As usual, he missed the train and had to wait 5 extra minutes. As usual, he pondered why it seemed to always happen to him, arriving at the train station just in time to watch the train leave. 

As the talking voices on the commentary podcast grew evermore increasingly frustrated and angry over the latest tax increases, so did the stress levels. He felt more and more angry over the fact that he would be late, even thou no meetings or urgent work was waiting for him at work. The train station slowly filled up with commuters again, each with their own little headsets, sending out small disturbances of air directly into each ear canal. No one cared about what was going on around them, each in a half-slumber state, only mechanically moving towards yet another boring job in a boring place with irrelevant ambitions.  

In some sort of way, this community of commuters has its own norms and distinct dialects. Don't talk too loud, and do not have the speakers on your phone on. Do not complain about overfilled train carts to everyone else. Everyone moves around like a modern version of zombies, not nimble enough to make the flow smooth, but bumping into each other and creating small disturbances thorughout the crowds moving slowly but determined towards their destination. 

He felt exhausted. Like everyday was just a continuation of the day before, with no purpose, no meaning. It is not supposed to be like this. It is not even shades of grey, but the same egg-white colored day that is smeared across the calendar. Work is good but dull, exercise is okay but he could be in better shape, his friends are good but boring.  Even the commute has been going okay, with no large delays or cancelled trains to make the day at least somewhat different.  Everything was okay on the surface but there was nothing beneath, no substsance nor any 

If this all? Is this the 